===============
Yung-Yu's Notes
===============

Code development, C++ and Python, computational sciences and software
engineering, high-performance computing, conservation laws.

.. toctree::
  :maxdepth: 1

  nsd/index
  cese/index
  writings

Personal Information
====================

I was trained as a computational scientist and have been practicing scientific
computing and its software engineering since 2002.  I started in aerospace and
computational fluid dynamics (CFD), and worked on time-accurate simulations of
conservation laws, unstructured meshes of mixed elements, :doc:`the space-time
Conservation Element and Solution Element (CESE) method <cese/index>`, and
high-performance computing (HPC) and parallel computing.  In 2011, I switched
to the semiconductor industry to design and move forward software products for
optical proximity correction (OPC), which involves HPC, C++/Python hybrid
architecture, computational geometry, numerical optimization, etc.

In 2012, aided by great people in the open-source community, we hosted the
first `local PyCon in Taiwan <https://tw.pycon.org/>`__.  I enjoy the code and
community and will keep being active in Taiwan and nearby.

The experiences in the industries and open-source practices led me to conclude
that code development is at the central of scientific computing.  In 2019, I
started to organize the practices of building numerical software, i.e., the
computer programs employing numerical methods to solve mathematical or physical
problems, in :doc:`a course <nsd/index>`.  Useful information should be
circulated among the practitioners.

.. _contact:

You can find me |mastodon_link|, `@yungyuc <https://twitter.com/yungyuc>`__ and
my code at https://github.com/yungyuc.  For professional discussions please use
https://www.linkedin.com/in/yungyuc and state clearly who you are and what you
want in your connect invitation.  But, as always, email works: `yyc@sciwork.dev
<mailto:Yung-Yu %20 Chen %20%3c yyc@sciwork.dev %3e>`__.

.. |mastodon_link| raw:: html

  <a rel="me" href="https://mtd.pythonasia.org/@yyc">@yyc@mtd.pythonasia.org</a>

.. admonition:: Footer

  I would love to learn interesting problems and share in the setting of open
  source, but expect no change to my full-time employment status.

.. vim: set ff=unix ft=rst fenc=utf8:
