=============================
NSD Schedule 2024 Spring NYCU
=============================

.. begin schedule contents

`Link to NYCU course system.
<https://timetable.nycu.edu.tw/?r=main/crsoutline&Acy=112&Sem=2&CrsNo=535703>`__

The course introduces the art of building numerical software, i.e., computer
programs applying numerical methods for solving mathematical, scientific, or
engineering problems.  We will be using Python, C++, and other tools (e.g.,
bash, git, make, etc.) to learn the modern development processes.  This is a
practical course.

Homework takes 30% of grade, mid-term exam 30%, and term project 40%.  You need
to submit homework assignments using both GitHub PR (the homework repository
https://github.com/yungyuc/nsdhw_24sp) and E3.

.. warning::

  Please read everything carefully before taking this course.

.. _nsd-24sp-project:

Term Project
============

Practical skills can only be acquired by practicing.  The term project is design
for the practice.  Please read about it at :doc:`../../project/project`.

The course requests you to find a topic to code for.  Because most people are
not familiar with numerical software, it may be difficult.  I work with the
`sciwork community <https://sciwork.dev>`__ to help you.  Please join the
discord server https://discord.gg/tZsUnx4XmB and follow the rules.  (If you
simply want to make friends who code, welcome too.)

The project proposal should be submit through the homework repository
https://github.com/yungyuc/nsdhw_24sp.

.. _nsd-24sp-enroll:

No Additional Enrollment
========================

If the enrollment system says the course is full, it is full.  It is the limit
of my resource for helping the class.  I do not plan to take additional
enrollment, but if you can convince me that you will learn well without my help,
I will consider.  The way to convince me is to build the teaching code
https://github.com/solvcon/modmesh.  Make sure it works by running two of its
apps and know what they do.  Go to https://discord.gg/P9U7PFv to show your
results or ask questions.

If you can learn well without my help, you are capable of training yourself with
the materials without needing to take the course.  (If you do not understand
what I meant, perhaps you need my help.)  I will offer the course in every
semester and you can take it next time.  Alternately, join `sciwork
<https://sciwork.dev>`__ and learn it at your own pace.

.. _nsd-24sp-email-convention:

Email Discussions
=================

Should you have any questions about the course, please send me :ref:`an email
<contact>` with the subject line starting with ``[nsd-course]``.  Email is a
great tool for serious discussions and I prefer it.  For homework grading,
please send an email to the grader.  If the question is about the materials on
the homework repository, you may file an issue.

.. _nsd-24sp-time-table:

Time Table
==========

Lectures, homework assignments, and projects are listed here.  Additional
meetings may be added if necessary.

.. list-table::
  :header-rows: 1
  :align: center
  :width: 100%

  * - Week
    - Date
    - Subject
    - Comments
  * - 1
    - 2/19
    - :doc:`Introduction <../../00intro>`
    -
  * - 2
    - 2/26
    - Unit 1: :doc:`../../01engineering/engineering`
    - hw #1
  * - 3
    - 3/4
    - Unit 2: :doc:`../../02numpy/numpy`
    - proposal open
  * - 4
    - 3/11
    - Unit 3: :doc:`../../03cpp/cpp`
    - hw #2
  * - 5
    - 3/18
    - Unit 4: :doc:`../../04matrix/matrix`
    -
  * - 6
    - 3/25
    - Unit 5: :doc:`../../05cache/cache`
    - hw #3; proposal due
  * - 7
    - 4/1
    - Proposal review
    -
  * - 8
    - 4/8
    - Mid-term examination
    -
  * - 9
    - 4/15
    - Unit 6: :doc:`../../06simd/simd`
    -
  * - 10
    - 4/22
    - Unit 7: :doc:`../../07mem/mem`
    - hw #4
  * - 11
    - 4/29
    - Unit 8: :doc:`../../08smart/smart`
    -
  * - 12
    - 5/6
    - Unit 9: :doc:`../../09moderncpp/moderncpp`
    - hw #5
  * - 13
    - 5/13
    - Unit 10: :doc:`../../10cpppy/cpppy`
    -
  * - 14
    - 5/20
    - Unit 11: :doc:`../../11arraydesign/arraydesign`
    - hw #6
  * - 15
    - 5/27
    - Unit 12: :doc:`../../12advpy/advpy`
    -
  * - 16
    - 6/3
    - Project presentation
    -
  * - 17
    - 6/10
    - No meeting (dragon boat festival holiday)
    -
  * - 18
    - 6/17
    - No meeting
    -

.. vim: set ff=unix fenc=utf8 sw=2 ts=2 sts=2 tw=79:
