=============================
NSD Schedule 2024 Autumn NYCU
=============================

.. begin schedule contents

`Link to NYCU course system.
<https://timetable.nycu.edu.tw/?r=main/crsoutline&Acy=113&Sem=1&CrsNo=535702&lang=>`__

.. warning::

  Please read everything carefully before taking this course.

The practical course introduces the art of building numerical software, i.e.,
computer programs applying numerical methods for solving mathematical,
scientific, or engineering problems.  We will be using Python, C++, and other
tools (bash, git, make, etc.) to learn the modern development processes.

Homework takes 30% of grade, mid-term exam 30%, and term project 40%.  You need
to submit homework assignments using both GitHub PR (the homework repository
https://github.com/yungyuc/nsdhw_24au) and E3.

.. _nsd-24au-project:

Term Project
============

Practical skills are learned by doing.  The lectures are to facilitate your
work.  The term project plays a central role in the course.  Read it at
:doc:`../../project/project`.  Upon enrollment, you need to have an idea about
what to do for your term project.  Your preformance of the term project will be
assessed primarily through the presentation scheduled at the end of the
semester.  You may work on a standalone project of your own ideas or contribute
to an existing open-source project for the presentation.

It is required to constantly discuss your term project.  The course works with
the `sciwork community <https://sciwork.dev>`__ to provide you an environment
for the technical discussions.  Bring your term project to the `sciwork meetup
(on-site) <https://sciwork.dev/meetup/>`__ or the `sciwork discord \#nsd channel
(online) <https://discord.gg/tZsUnx4XmB>`__.  (You can reach me with the handle
@yyc on the discord server.)

I prepared a teaching code https://github.com/solvcon/modmesh for you to observe
how to conduct collaborative code development in an open source way.  The
project is also developed for real-world applications.  You may contribute to
the teaching code and use it for the term project.

.. _nsd-24au-enroll:

No Additional Enrollment
========================

If the enrollment system says the course is full, it is full.  I do not accept
additional enrollment.  It is the limit of my resource for helping the class.
But I am happy to discuss with you in the `sciwork on-site events
<https://sciwork.dev>`__ or `online <https://discord.gg/tZsUnx4XmB>`__.

.. _nsd-24au-email-convention:

Email Discussions
=================

.. warning::

  Students are responsible for following the email protocol described here.
  
  Also, email is the professional tool for technical discussions.  You need to
  get familiar with it sooner or later.

Should you have any questions about the course, please send me :ref:`an email
<contact>` with the subject line starting with ``[nsd-course]``.  For homework
grading, please send an email to the grader.  If the question is about the
materials on the homework repository, you may file an issue.

.. _nsd-24au-time-table:

Time Table
==========

The lecture is 7:00am -- 9:50am every Monday in the classroom EC114.  Personal
discussions may be arranged on 10:00am after the lecture in meeting room EC500A,
or by appointment using `sciwork meetup <https://sciwork.dev/meetup/>`__.

Lectures, homework assignments, and projects are listed here.  Additional
meetings may be added if necessary.

.. list-table::
  :header-rows: 1
  :stub-columns: 1
  :align: left
  :width: 100%

  * - Week
    - Date
    - Subject
    - Comments
  * - 1
    - 9/2 Mon
    - :doc:`Introduction <../../00intro>`
    - | hw #1
      | proposal open
      | start to prototype
  * - 2
    - 9/9 Mon
    - Unit 1: :doc:`../../01engineering/engineering`
    -
  * - 3
    - 9/16 Mon
    - Unit 2: :doc:`../../02numpy/numpy`
    - | proposal due
  * - 4
    - 9/23 Mon
    - Unit 3: :doc:`../../03cpp/cpp`
    - hw #2
  * - 5
    - 9/30 Mon
    - No meeting
    -
  * - 6
    - 10/7 Mon
    - Unit 4: :doc:`../../04matrix/matrix`
    -
  * - 7
    - 10/14 Mon
    - Unit 5: :doc:`../../05cache/cache`
    - | hw #3
      | prototype review
  * - 8
    - 10/21 Mon
    - Mid-term examination
    -
  * - 9
    - 10/28 Mon
    - Unit 6: :doc:`../../06simd/simd`
    -
  * - 10
    - 11/4 Mon
    - Unit 7: :doc:`../../07mem/mem`
    - hw #4
  * - 11
    - 11/11 Mon
    - Unit 8: :doc:`../../08smart/smart`
    -
  * - 12
    - 11/18 Mon
    - Unit 9: :doc:`../../09moderncpp/moderncpp`
    - hw #5
  * - 13
    - 11/25 Mon
    - Unit 10: :doc:`../../10cpppy/cpppy`
    -
  * - 14
    - 12/2 Mon
    - Unit 11: :doc:`../../11arraydesign/arraydesign`
    - hw #6
  * - 15
    - 12/9 Mon
    - Unit 12: :doc:`../../12advpy/advpy`
    -
  * - 16
    - 12/16 Mon
    - Project presentation
    -

.. vim: set ff=unix fenc=utf8 sw=2 ts=2 sts=2 tw=79:
